WASHINGTON — President Obama must be touched by all the concern
Republicans are showing him these days. As Congress examines security breaches
at the White House, even opposition lawmakers who have spent the last six years
fighting his every initiative have expressed deep worry for his security.
“The American people want to know: Is the president safe?” Representative
Darrell Issa of California, the Republican committee chairman who has made it his
mission to investigate all sorts of Obama administration missteps, solemnly intoned
as he opened a hearing into the lapses on Tuesday.
Yet it would not be all that surprising if Mr. Obama were a little wary of all the
professed sympathy. Although the target of the legislative scrutiny is the Secret
Service, not the president, the furor over security has left the White House on the
defensive. At Tuesday’s Capitol Hill hearing and at the daily White House news
briefing, the questions fueled an air of scandal: Who knew what when, and was
there a cover­up?
Democrats joined in the grilling, and some were as tough as or tougher than
any Republican on the Secret Service director, Julia Pierson. But privately, some
Democratic officeholders and strategists have complained that the episode
contributes to a broader impression that the Obama administration’s competence
has come under fire on a variety of fronts, including last year’s botched rollout of
Mr. Obama’s health care program, the breakdown of services at the Veterans
Affairs Department and the handling of a series of international crises.10/1/2014 Showing Concern for the President, Even While Criticizing Him - NYTimes.com
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/us/politics/showing-concern-for-the-president-even-while-criticizing-him-.html?hp&action=click… 2/4
Coming just weeks before midterm elections, they said, the intense focus on
the matter might further undercut confidence in the government Mr. Obama runs
even though it was hardly his fault an intruder with a knife made it into the White
House.
“This is an opportunity to make it seem like nobody’s in charge in the Obama
administration, even though it’s almost certainly not the case that political
appointees could have done anything to change the facts in this situation,” said Matt
Bennett, a White House aide under President Bill Clinton and now vice president of
Third Way, a political group. “I’m not surprised that they’re doing this.”
Like other Democrats, Mr. Bennett said Congress had a duty to exercise
oversight over the Secret Service and investigate what went wrong, and he said
serious questions had been raised in recent days. At the same time, Democrats said,
if it happened to damage the perception of the president in the process, Republicans
would not object.
“I do think for a lot of Republican congressmen, this is a twofer,” said Erik
Smith, a former House Democratic aide and a campaign adviser to Mr. Obama.
“The Secret Service may be in the line of fire, but they’re not the only target.”
Not every Democrat sees it that way. Paul Begala, no stranger to partisan
warfare as a longtime adviser to Mr. Clinton, said Republican lawmakers were
asking the right questions out of genuine concern. “This is totally on the level,” he
said. “They’re acting like real human beings and patriotic Americans.”
Other Democrats said Republicans had good reason to preserve that
impression. “So far there is bipartisan outrage and concern,” said Margie Omero, a
strategist for Democratic candidates for nearly 20 years who has studied midterm
voters in swing Senate races this year. “But at this time of year, candidates will try
just about anything to find an opening. It could definitely backfire if Republicans
look like they’re making political hay out of a threat to the president’s life.”
Republicans rejected the notion that their inquiry had any political
implications. “This is not a Republican issue or a Democrat issue,” said
Representative Jason Chaffetz of Utah, chairman of a subcommittee looking into
the episode. “This is an American issue. I don’t want it to be the political football,
but we in the United States of America are self­critical. It’s one of the beauties of10/1/2014 Showing Concern for the President, Even While Criticizing Him - NYTimes.com
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/us/politics/showing-concern-for-the-president-even-while-criticizing-him-.html?hp&action=click… 3/4
our nation is we do hold ourselves accountable.”
And they were aided by the tough statements voiced at Tuesday’s hearing by
several of the committee’s Democrats, who told Ms. Pierson that they did not have
faith in her leadership and accused her of caring more about protecting her
reputation than the president’s life.
While the director of the Secret Service is appointed by the president, the
White House under either party typically defers to the agency on how to handle the
president’s security. Even when a president is angry at missteps — as reports
suggest Mr. Obama was after a 2011 shooting at the White House when one of his
daughters was home — he rarely expresses that publicly. For one, it might come
across as impolitic. For another, it might offend the very people a president depends
on most.
So even though Mr. Obama had nothing to do with the various problems
involving his security beyond appointing Ms. Pierson last year, his White House
now finds itself in the position of defending the Secret Service to a degree.
At his daily briefing on Tuesday, Josh Earnest, the White House press
secretary, was buffeted with sharp questions about when the president found out
about the intruder and whether the Secret Service had been candid in describing that
incident and others. While acknowledging concerns over the incident, Mr. Earnest
gave Ms. Pierson an endorsement at a time when some critics are calling for her
resignation.
“What we saw was a willingness that she demonstrated in testifying before
Congress under oath on live television today, a commitment to leading an agency
with a very difficult mission,” he told reporters. “She is somebody who took
responsibility for the incident that occurred about 10 days ago. She also took
responsibility for ensuring that the necessary reforms were implemented to ensure it
never happens again. That is a sign of leadership.”
And that is a conclusion that Republicans can disagree with, all with Mr.
Obama’s interests at heart.
