Dr. Kimberly Woodward Keefe and Roy Martin Smith IV were married Saturday at St. Mary’s Catholic Church in Newport, R.I. The Rev. George S. Salzmann, the Roman Catholic chaplain to the Harvard graduate schools, performed the ceremony.
The couple met at Harvard, from which they graduated; the groom cum laude.
Dr. Smith, 31, is a third-year resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Yale-New Haven Hospital. She received a medical degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Candace H. Keefe and Dr. David L. Keefe of New York. The bride’s father is the chairman of the obstetrics and gynecology department at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York.
Mr. Smith, 32, is a corporate associate, specializing in investment management, at the law firm Goodwin Procter. He works in its Boston and New York offices. He received a law degree cum laude from Boston University.
He is a son of Mary A. Smith and Mr. Smith III of Duxbury, Mass. The groom’s father, who is retired, worked in Quincy, Mass., as the chief information officer for the United States unit of Ahold, a Dutch food retailing company that operates Stop & Shop stores and other store chains.

rom All Movie Guide: Standing merely five feet tall, Jada Pinkett Smith is known for her high-energy charm, receiving attention for the spunky role she played in her friend Keenan Ivory Wayans' Low Down Dirty Shame in 1994. She was born on September 18, 1971, in Baltimore, MD, where she grew up and went on to study dance at Baltimore School for the Arts. She then attended North Carolina School of Arts, but dropped out when Wayans found her an agent to launch her acting career. Real notice came when she worked on Bill Cosby's series A Different World starting in 1991. Thereafter she appeared in several films including her more serious roles as the single mother in Menace II Society and the girlfriend in Jason's Lyric (1994). Eddie Murphy's 1996 rendition of The Nutty Professor brought her back to comedy, and the extensive hype around the film allowed her fame to swell. In 1997, she married fellow actor (and former rap star) Will Smith; the following year, she appeared in Woo and Return to Paradise, and gave birth to son Jadan. Pinkett Smith made a cameo in Spike Lee's Bamboozled in 2000, and then returned to a serious lead role in Doug McHenry's Kingdom Come (2001) with Whoopi Goldberg, which was shot while she was pregnant with daughter Willow.
Her film career later ramping up with roles in the two Matrix sequels, the Tom Cruise thriller Collateral, and with vocal work in the Madagascar series, Pinkett Smith made the leap to television as a compassion head of nursing on TNT's Hawthorne, which debuted in 2009 and ran for three seasons. An ardent supporter of Barack Obama, Pinkett Smith also fronts the heavy metal band Wicked Wisdom, which released their first CD in 2006, and performed on the Ozzfest tour in 2009. ~ Sarah Sloboda, Rovi

Sarah Stoll Smith, a daughter of Flora J. Smith and David S. Smith, both of Darien, Conn., was married Saturday evening to Keith Hunter Butts, the son of Diana C. Butts and Larry H. Butts of Medford, Ore. The Very Rev. Elton O. Smith Jr., an Episcopal priest and a grandfather of the bride and a former executive director at the National Cathedral in Washington, performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church in Providence, R.I.
The bride, 27, is pursuing a master’s degree in medical science at Tufts. She graduated from Washington University in St. Louis.
Her father works in Darien as an independent financial management consultant. Her mother is a vice president in the corporate and investment banking division of JPMorgan Chase in New York, where she oversees an operations department responsible for the assets of institutional clients.
The groom, 28, is a fourth-year medical student at Brown. He graduated from Williams College.
His mother is a flight attendant based in Medford for Alaska Airlines and an author of several cookbooks about baking. His father, a commercial pilot, retired from American Airlines as a captain based in Los Angeles.

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The crowd chanted for Geno Smith’s backup. Smith cursed at a heckling fan. Sheldon Richardson afterward told those who booed to shut up.
This is what a three-game losing streak sounds like. And this is what it looked like: a total mess.
The Jets’ offense was as disorganized as elementary school recess. Their secondary was shredded for two more passing touchdowns, their defense pummeled for two more long scoring drives.
The Jets plunged into a state of flux by succumbing, 24-17, to the Detroit Lions. They finished the first quarter of their season at 1-3, thumped by talented quarterbacks — Aaron Rodgers, Jay Cutler and, on Sunday, Matthew Stafford — and the more imposing section of their schedule begins next weekend.
The chief investment officer of the Yaleendowment, David F. Swensen, set the bar for universities starting in 1988 when he created a widely imitated blueprint for high-octane investment returns with heavy doses of private equity and other alternatives to stocks and bonds.
Then from 1990 to 2005, Jack Meyer of Harvard gave Yale a run for its money with a streak of returns almost as sizzling, achieved by a team of swashbuckling in-house traders whose sky-high pay eventually led to their departures after an outcry from faculty and alumni.
But over the last decade, miscues by university management and more tepid investment returns have pulled down Harvard’s results, culminating in the June resignation of Jane L. Mendillo, the chief executive of the Harvard Management Company, who started just before the market collapse in July 2008.
GENEVA, N.Y. — She was 18 years old, a freshman, and had been on campus for just two weeks when one Saturday night last September her friends grew worried because she had been drinking and suddenly disappeared.
Around midnight, the missing girl texted a friend, saying she was frightened by a student she had met that evening. “Idk what to do,” she wrote. “I’m scared.” When she did not answer a call, the friend began searching for her.
In the early-morning hours on the campus of Hobart and William Smith Colleges in central New York, the friend said, he found her — bent over a pool table as a football player appeared to be sexually assaulting her from behind in a darkened dance hall with six or seven people watching and laughing. Some had their cellphones out, apparently taking pictures, he said.
Dick Smith, who made flesh peel from famous actors’ faces, who made the young old and the beautiful hideous and who transformed a girl into a particularly possessed tween — all while working as one of film and television’s most original and accomplished makeup artists, died on Wednesday in Los Angeles. He was 92.
His death was confirmed in a Twitter message by his friend Rick Baker, an Academy Award-winning makeup artist who was once his assistant.
Before computers claimed so much of the simulated gore and metamorphosis depicted in modern moviemaking, Mr. Smith did his work with plaster life masks, liquid foam latex and painstaking perfectionism.
He traced his career to a particular day in the early 1940s when, as a freshman at Yale on his way to becoming a dentist, he stumbled on a book in the Co-Op that he could not stop reading. Not the most literary of Ivy League texts, it was titled “Paint, Powder and Makeup.”
Inspired, he began tinkering with some of the materials described in the book and soon found himself more inclined to mangle mock teeth than repair real ones. He ended up working out of a low-tech lab in the basement of his home in Larchmont, N.Y. He became a craftsman and a conjurer, and not the kind of makeup artist known for making people prettier.
By PATTI SMITHAUG. 5, 2014

ESPN suspended Stephen A. Smith for a week on Tuesday for comments that suggested women should avoid provoking men into assaulting them.
Smith raised the subject of provocation last Friday during a discussion on “First Take,” on ESPN2, about the two-game suspension received byBaltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice from the N.F.L. over allegations that he beat his fiancée, now his wife, in a casino elevator. Smith’s remarks led to a rebuke on Twitter from another ESPN star, Michelle Beadle.

