Man is the measure of all things.
A career open to men of all talents.
You shall not lie with a man, as with a women: it is abomination (Leviticus 18:22)
You educate a man; you educate a man. You educate a woman; you educate a generation.
I won't be a rockstar. I will be a legend.
Death is the solution to all problems. No man - no problem.
Since god has given us the papacy, let us enjoy it.
Let the ruling classes tremble at a communist revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. Workingmen of all countries, unite!
Little else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence from the lowest barbarism but peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice: all the rest being brought about by the natural course of things.
Liberte, egalite, fraternite.
The death of one man is a tragedy.The death of millions is a statistic.
When we hang the capitalists they will sell us the rope we use.
It has served us well, this myth of Christ. 
I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the public good.
Religion is the opium of the masses.
The production of too many useful things results in too many useless people.
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.
I am not a human being, I walk in eternity.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.
Women marry because they are curious. Men marry because they are bored. Both are disappointed.
Peace in our time.
If Hitler invaded Hell, I would side with the devil.
From time to time the tree of liberty must be refreshed  with the blood of patriots and the blood of tyrants.
Common sense is not so common.
I can understand Communism, but not Socialism.
Flowers are restful to look at. They have neither emotions nor conflicts.
There's an old saying in Tennessee -- I know it's in Texas, probably in Tennessee -- that says, fool me once, shame on --shame on you. Fool me -- you can't get fooled again.
Corporations are people, my friend.
I am the punishment of GodIf you had not committed great sins, God would not have sent a punishment like me upon you.
Let them eat cake.
imagine all the people, living life in peace.
All you need is love.
The history of saints is mainly the history of insane people.
War is much too serious a thing to be left to military men.
The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
The military might of a country represents its national strength. Only when it builds up its military might in every way can it develop into a thriving country.
Those who do not love me do not deserve to live.
Mandatory education is a coercive education that suppresses freedom. To impose specific teaching materials is a dictatorial act
History is a set of lies agreed upon.
Democracy is beautiful in theory; in practice it is a fallacy.
The truth is that men are tired of liberty.
God is dead.
The great majority of men have no right to existence, but are a misfortune to higher men.
Most people do not really want freedom, because freedom involves responsibility, and most people are frightened of responsibility.
While the law of competition may be sometimes hard for the individual, it is best for the race, because it ensures the survival of the fittest in every department.
Just as a candle cannot burn without fire, men cannot live without a spiritual life.
A thorough knowledge of the Bible is worth more than a college education.
War is peace, freedom is slavery, ignorance is strength.
All people are equal, but some people are more equal then others.
If you scratch hard enough on the test paper, the answers will appear
