Many of Stuyvesant’s English teachers lead quite unsurprising double lives as teachers by day and writers by night. Whether they write poetry, memoirs, or essays, many teachers are passionate writers—a side of them that is rarely exposed to their students. However, three English teachers, Alicia Pohan, Amanda Usher, and Mark Henderson have agreed to share some of their creative writing with the Spectator. Their writing, alongside a short synopsis of their lives as writers, is featured below.

Alicia Pohan

By: Danielle Eisenman

This is Alicia Pohan’s first year at Stuyvesant, and she is currently teaching Freshman Composition and Early British Literature. She wrote poetry constantly from seventh through ninth grade, but then stopped because she began to feel like her writing was becoming less personal. Additionally, Pohan began to feel more shy sharing her poetry. It wasn’t until a fewyears ago in graduate schoolthat Pohan felt “poetry calling [her] back” after she was asked to do a lot of personal writing, which pushed her out of her comfort zone.

Her poem “Firebreak” was written for a workshop assignment themed “rhythm.” While volunteering at a monkey rehabilitation center in South Africa in 2006, Pohan was tasked with creating a firebreak, which is an empty piece of land that stops a wildfire from spreading. She cites the “rhythmic hacking of the machetes” as she and others cleared an area of plants and trees as the inspiration for this poem.

 

Firebreak

By: Alicia Pohan

sun bears down on

me and all the

other women

wielding sword-like

blades, creating

space for fire to

stop before it

gets too vast and

takes the whole of

fields and huts and

lands made dry by

lack of rain, and

so we thrash, and

hack, and clear a

path—but fire is

always fire, and

we are only

women.

Amanda Usher

Amanda Usher is a student teacher in Stuyvesant and is currently a student at the Teachers College at Columbia University. She has harbored a love for writing since high school, where, as a junior, she wrote her first piece about the death of a friend. Usher, who went on to major in Creative Writing/English at Barnard College, began writing to better understand herself. According to Usher, writing is “a more private and self reflective process,” she said. Usher often revises older pieces because “as a writer, you must have an active eye and remember that no piece is ever final or even finished,” she explained.

The poem, “Dear Daddy, I Hate Football,” was inspired by Usher’s relationship with her father. “I have a very unique relationship with my father and writing about him has always been difficult. This piece best highlights my happier thoughts regarding my dad and the very few things he’s taught me: enjoy sports, eat and drink well, and even if you aren’t content, well, fake it,” Usher said. 

Dear Daddy, I Hate Football

By: Amanda Usher

 

It was never a struggle.

 

She used to watch you

do it all the time

as if it were natural

she wore your glasses,

she drank milk and ate cookies,

all the etceteras of content

while you leaned on the couch

arm-extended jaw-opened and oh

 

she was so comfortable

like a gymnast that bends

at the hips-flopping

over in halves

she would smile

and laugh at war paint.

Mark Henderson

Mark Henderson is a tall, bearded man who wears sneakers and glasses. He teaches Freshman Composition, American Literature, and AP Society and Self. Henderson has managed to combine his life as a writer with his life as a teacher, as he often writes the pieces that he assigns to his classes. Being the father of two six-year-old boys, Henderson is generally very busy and has difficulty getting himself to just sit down and write. However, his students motivate him to write or rewrite four to five pieces a year. “If I tell a bunch of teenagers, ‘Oh, I’m doing this, too!’ then I can’t back out,” he said.

Henderson also writes assignments with his students to show them that their work can be personal and meaningful at the same time. “The material we ask [our students] to write can sometimes be difficult, or hard to get out on paper,” he said. “So I feel like I should havethe experience of writing these types of things, too.”

Henderson wrote “Out of the Mud, Into the Ice Cream” with his Society and Self class. It is an emulation of “Middlesex” by Jeffery Eugenides, a multigenerational autobiography. “Out of the Mud, Into the Ice Cream” is funny, poignant, and confusingly brilliant. It’s something that every member of the student body can connect with, because, as Henderson said, “Everyone has a memoir.”

excerpt from Out of the Mud, Into the Ice Cream

[NOTE: This excerpt has been trimmed in the interest of space.]

By: Mark Henderson

I’m maybe thirty years old. Grandpa Henderson is still alive, and we’re visiting. Every year or two, my father would drive from Nevada to New Jersey to make what always seemed like an obligatory visit to his family. After my grandmother died, those visits got harder…

On this day about ten years ago, there were five of us sitting in the living room of my grandfather’s house out by the Delaware Water Gap. Me, my father, my grandfather, my brother Clark and, lucky her, Elena. Four Henderson men and my now-wife. We had no plans for the afternoon except to “visit.” What this meant in Henderson terms is that we’d sit awkwardly, terribly, for hours. We’d stare off at the walls, perhaps at some picture that happened to get in the way of our gaze, but more often at a wall, a curtain. We’d struggle to make conversation about weather, graduations, pets. The conversation might go like this: 

Me: “Is it always so hot out here?”

Grandpa Henderson: “Yep.”

My brother Clark: “….”

My father: “….”

Grandpa Henderson: “And it snows in the winter.”

Me: “Ah.”

My father, angrily: “….”

Clark: “….”

Elena, inwardly: “What the hell is happening?”

We were used to these silences. We’d long lost the ability to say real things to each other. In a way, the fact that we could all be in the same place together, suffering quietly, was the ultimate testimony to our status as a family. We couldn’t talk to each other, except for a brief go-round about my grandfather’s Rush Limbaugh magazine, or my brother’s upcoming enlistment in the Marines. But we knew how to wait out the silence together.
